Salt-SSH with Salt Bundle (#65)
uyuni-project/uyuni-rfc: accepted/00000-salt-ssh-with-salt-bundle.md

- Feature Name: Salt-SSH with Salt Bundle
- Start Date: 2021-12-08

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

> Use Salt Bundle to handle Salt-SSH sessions on managed system side.

Reviewer: Your addendum improves the context a lot. Although no external documentation is linked, I am satisfied.

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

Due to the deprecation of Python 2 and dropping support of it, while some of supported Linux systems still has no proper Python 3 version supported by Salt, we need to have a way to process Salt-SSH events on managed system side.

We can deploy Salt Bundle with bundled Python inside the virtual environment and handle all the Salt-SSH events using Salt Bundle with making Salt-SSH independent from Python on the managed system.
Additionally we are extending the list of working modules as Salt Bundle contains binary python modules required by some of Salt modules.

> This approach will help us to limit the number of supported versions of Salt codebase and drop `py26-compat-salt`, `py27-compat-salt` and all Python 2 dependencies maintenance.

Reviewer: This is also cleared up. Thanks again!

# Detailed design
[design]: #detailed-design

## Uyuni roster

> We can use Uyuni roster module to provide roster data instead of creating flat roster files with Java. PR moving the logic to Uyuni roster on Java side: https://github.com/uyuni-project/uyuni/pull/4457

Reviewer: Thanks for the clarification!

## Pre flight script

Salt can execute a shell script on the salt-ssh client before the "real salt-ssh execution" starts. This script downloads the salt-bundle package from the appropriate bootstrap repository and extracts the virtual environment.

The "Pre flight script" calculates the bootstrap repository URL in a similar manner to the existing boostrap.sh script, based on the operating system and OS architecture of the system it is executed on. It requires one parameter from the Uyuni server: (host, port) (entry point) for SSH connections through tunnels.

> By-default there is no way to pass additional parameters to pre fligt script running on the managed system. We need to pass the entry point (host and port) to get bootstrap repository from. The salt codebase need to be modified to pass additional parameters, otherwise we have to generate pre flight script individually for each managed system.

Reviewer: In the new version of this RFC I understand this part better a lot. Thanks for addressing it!

## Deploying Salt Bundle to the managed system

We don't need to install Salt Bundle package on the managed system. We need to extract the virtual environment of the bundle from the package. Pre flight script is deploying it as secribed above.

## Using proper salt codebase

> On deploying Salt Bundle with pre flight script, without modification salt-thin deployment, we will get two different codebases of salt deployed on the managed system. We can prevent deploying salt-thin in case if Salt Bundle has been deployed already and use it as preferred salt codebase to handle salt-ssh session with on managed system side.

Reviewer: Okay the first part is done in my eyes. But can we link what Salt-Thin is in this case!

> On deploying Salt Bundle with pre flight script, without modification salt-thin deployment, we will get two different codebases of salt deployed on the managed system. We can prevent deploying salt-thin in case if Salt Bundle has been deployed already and use it as preferred salt codebase to handle salt-ssh session with on managed system side.

Author: I think this link is outdated. `salt-thin` is a part of main salt codebase now.
Maybe just to clarify what `salt-thin` is? Like:
```suggestion
`salt-thin` is a tarball with salt codebase created with the master to deploy salt on the managed system.
```

> On deploying Salt Bundle with pre flight script, without modification salt-thin deployment, we will get two different codebases of salt deployed on the managed system. We can prevent deploying salt-thin in case if Salt Bundle has been deployed already and use it as preferred salt codebase to handle salt-ssh session with on managed system side.

Reviewer: Yes that is a step. I would even be happier if we have a link to the Saltstack Docs for that mechnism. Is it maybe this here? - https://docs.saltproject.io/en/latest/ref/runners/all/salt.runners.thin.html

> On deploying Salt Bundle with pre flight script, without modification salt-thin deployment, we will get two different codebases of salt deployed on the managed system. We can prevent deploying salt-thin in case if Salt Bundle has been deployed already and use it as preferred salt codebase to handle salt-ssh session with on managed system side.

Author: Bit explained in https://github.com/uyuni-project/uyuni-rfc/pull/65/commits/9519b521d6d65989aedd9895e7c6bb796f1ca2a3 and link is also there

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

  * Salt Bundle consumes more space than salt-thin on managed system
  * Salt is creating additional SSH connection to run the pre flight script 
  * Pre flight script requires an access to the bootstrap repository (salt-thin is deployed with ssh, no http(s) connection needed for salt-ssh)
  * We need to modify salt codebase to handle Salt Bundle the proper way

# Alternatives
[alternatives]: #alternatives

- Prepare Salt Bundle for each OS and architecture on the Server, but it just make pre flight script bit smaller, the overall complexity is higher due to the bunch of additional changes on server side.
- With not doing this the systems having not having sufficient Python version can't be managed with Salt-SSH and bootstrapped with web UI

# Unresolved questions
[unresolved]: #unresolved-questions

> - The way to update Salt Bundle used for Salt-SSH on the managed system and validate it (cases when we need to redeploy it).

Author: Put one suggested solution to check for the updates in https://github.com/uyuni-project/uyuni-rfc/pull/65/commits/9519b521d6d65989aedd9895e7c6bb796f1ca2a3
But the validation of the deployed salt codebase is still unresolved.

> - The way to update Salt Bundle used for Salt-SSH on the managed system and validate it (cases when we need to redeploy it).

Reviewer: For me this is a possible approach and thus my concern is resolved.

- Feature Name: Salt-SSH with Salt Bundle
- Start Date: 2021-12-08

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

> Use Salt Bundle to handle Salt-SSH sessions on managed system side.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Use Salt Bundle to handle Salt-SSH sessions on the minion side.
```

Unless there is a reason to, I suggest to stick to "minion" everywhere in this document.

Salt Bundle is a single package containing salt codebase, Python and python modules required for salt.

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

> Due to the deprecation of Python 2 and dropping support of it, while some of supported Linux systems still has no proper Python 3 version supported by Salt, we need to have a way to process Salt-SSH events on managed system side.

Reviewer 2: Can you qualify what those systems/versions are exactly?

So we don't need to maintain old salt codebases, but focus only on the latest one.

# Detailed design
[design]: #detailed-design

## Uyuni roster

We can use Uyuni roster module to provide roster data instead of creating flat roster files with Java. PR moving the logic to Uyuni roster on Java side: https://github.com/uyuni-project/uyuni/pull/4457

This change can help to avoid creating temporary roster files (https://docs.saltproject.io/en/latest/topics/ssh/roster.html) and implements caching additionally.

## Pre flight script

Salt can execute a shell script on the salt-ssh client before the "real salt-ssh execution" starts.
This script downloads the salt-bundle package from the appropriate bootstrap repository and extracts the virtual environment.
By-default there is no way to pass additional parameters to pre fligt script running on the managed system.

The "Pre flight script" calculates the bootstrap repository URL in a similar manner to the existing boostrap.sh script, based on the operating system and OS architecture of the system it is executed on.
It requires one parameter from the Uyuni server: (host, port) (entry point) for SSH connections through tunnels.

> The salt codebase need to be modified to pass additional parameters, otherwise we have to generate pre flight script individually for each managed system.

Reviewer 2: What are the pros and cons of each of the two alternatives presented here? Which one is preferred and thus proposed as part of this RFC?

## Deploying Salt Bundle to the managed system

We don't need to install Salt Bundle package on the managed system.
We need to extract the virtual environment of the bundle from the package.
Pre flight script is deploying it as described above.

## Using proper salt codebase

On deploying Salt Bundle with pre flight script, without modification salt-thin (`salt-thin` is a tarball with salt codebase created by the server to deploy salt on salt-ssh managed system: https://docs.saltproject.io/en/latest/ref/runners/all/salt.runners.thin.html) deployment, we will get two different codebases of salt deployed on the managed system (one codebase is from salt bundle package for the OS+arch and the other one is from salt-master delivered with salt-thin tarball).
As the sources of these two codebases are different (update channel of the Server and client tools relevant for the system) these codebases are not in sync.
We can prevent deploying salt-thin in case if Salt Bundle has been deployed already and use it as preferred salt codebase to handle salt-ssh session with on managed system side.

> In most cases the client tools channels are updating more frequently than the server and for the minions (not salt-ssh systems) we are using the salt codebase from client tools, it's better to use Salt Bundle codebase for salt-ssh systems.

Reviewer 2: IIUC this means we do not expect to ever use the salt-thin any longer. Is that correct, or are there exceptions?

Author: With the described approach and in my testing environment `salt-thin` is deployed only in case if salt bundle was not deployed for some reason (bootstrap repo is unavalaible or doesn't contain the bundle, or http(s) from the server is not accessible) and in case of using `salt-thin` python 3 must be installed on the system

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

>   * Salt Bundle consumes more space than salt-thin on managed system

Reviewer 2: Is it possible to have a quantification, even approximate? Eg. a 20% increase vs. a 200% increase.

Author: current extracted `salt-thin` with 3 salt codebases (`3002.2` from the master, `py26-compat-salt` and `py27-compat-salt`) is about 90Mb (~30+ Mb per each salt codebase), extracted salt bundle slightly larger than 100 Mb. On removing py26- and py27- `salt-thin` will be ~40Mb.

  * Salt is creating additional SSH connection to run the pre flight script 

>   * Pre flight script requires an access to the bootstrap repository (salt-thin is deployed with ssh, no http(s) connection needed for salt-ssh)

Reviewer 2: What else is needed from the bootstrap repository other than the Salt Bundle package?

Author: `venv-enabled-ARCH.txt` to define the path to the Salt Bundle package. Pre flight script gets just these 2 files.

Reviewer 2: Would it be possible / could it make simpler to transport those two files over the already-existing SSH channel to the minion instead of opening an http channel back to the Server?

Author: It requires quite significant changes in salt codebase related to salt-ssh sessions handling and impossible to do with pre flight script only. The problem is that pre flight script is used to calculate which salt bundle package should be used on base of system type and architecture. In case of using ssh do deploy these files we need few more ssh sessions to be open to the minion before, so it's more heavy from point of view of amount of open ssh connection prior the actual connection used to process the request on minion side. For this case it's better to implement something totally different than just pre flight script.

What we need:
1. Define the system type and architecture. In case of not having salt deployed yet, it's easier to do with a logic we get to the pre flight script from the bootstrap script.
2. Pass the system type and architecture to the server (salt-api in this case) and let it select the proper package to deploy on the system.
3. Extract the package on the system.

So yes, it's possible, but in this case it's better to avoid using the pre flight script feature from upstream and implement it different way with salt codebase on the server.

Reviewer 2: I am fine with the currently described alternative, feel free to copypaste information from the response you gave above as an alternative in the "Alternatives" section.

  * We need to modify salt codebase to handle Salt Bundle the proper way

# Alternatives
[alternatives]: #alternatives

- Prepare Salt Bundle for each OS and architecture on the Server, but it just make pre flight script bit smaller, the overall complexity is higher due to the bunch of additional changes on server side.
- With not doing this the systems having not having sufficient Python version can't be managed with Salt-SSH and bootstrapped with web UI

# Unresolved questions
[unresolved]: #unresolved-questions

- The way to update Salt Bundle used for Salt-SSH on the managed system and validate it (cases when we need to redeploy it).

>   It can be easily solved with including sha256 to `venv-enabled-ARCH.txt` in the root of bootstrap repo.

Reviewer 2: It looks like this unresolved question is now resolved, or at least we have a tentative answer. Please move this information in the RFC body, leaving only really-still-open questions here.

Author: Yup, I realized it on discussing with @SchoolGuy and PR appending the hash to `venv-enabled-ARCH.txt` was already merged. Will move it.

Author: But the validation of the code deployed (is it complete and unchanged) is still unknown.

So we don't need to maintain old salt codebases, but focus only on the latest one.

# Detailed design
[design]: #detailed-design

## Uyuni roster

We can use Uyuni roster module to provide roster data instead of creating flat roster files with Java. PR moving the logic to Uyuni roster on Java side: https://github.com/uyuni-project/uyuni/pull/4457

This change can help to avoid creating temporary roster files (https://docs.saltproject.io/en/latest/topics/ssh/roster.html) and implements caching additionally.

## Pre flight script

Salt can execute a shell script on the salt-ssh client before the "real salt-ssh execution" starts.
This script downloads the salt-bundle package from the appropriate bootstrap repository and extracts the virtual environment.
By-default there is no way to pass additional parameters to pre fligt script running on the minion.
In this case we have to generate individual pre flight script to each of the minion. The main drawback here is maintaining these pre flight script files.

> The other solution is to pass additional parameter to the static pre flight script.

Reviewer 2: As this is an RFC, please select one of the solutions and present it as the chosen one, listing the other in alternatives with its pros/cons as a justification of the one you picked.

The pre flight script calculates the bootstrap repository URL in a similar manner to the existing boostrap.sh script, based on the operating system and OS architecture of the system it is executed on.

> It requires one parameter from the Uyuni server: host, port (entry point) for different contact methods and pathes (SSH from server/proxy, direct access to the repos or with the tunnel).

Reviewer 2: Does this match the way normal repos are accessed by onboarded Salt-SSH minions?

Author: Yes, it works the same way, the only difference that the repo is not assigned to system's package manager.

The salt codebase need to be modified to pass additional parameters, therwise we have to generate pre flight script individually for each minion.

## Deploying Salt Bundle to the minion

We don't need to install Salt Bundle package on the minion.

> We need to extract the virtual environment of the bundle from the package.

Reviewer 2: What are the pros and cons of actually installing the package?

Author: For some of the usecases users may use the minion connected to the server with venv-salt-minion, but use it with the other system as salt-ssh minion with handling salt-ssh with salt bundle. I don't think we should really support such cases. The main reason is that we are not installing any package on salt-ssh minions, so why to change this with salt bundle with salt-ssh approach? Most of the users expects salt-ssh to be agentless management method, in case of installing the package the agent will be installed, but not used. And additionally: salt bundle package also deploys pkgset beacon notification plugins, configs etc. which are not required for salt-ssh.

Pre flight script is deploying it as described above.

## Using proper salt codebase

On deploying Salt Bundle with pre flight script, without modification salt-thin (`salt-thin` is a tarball with salt codebase created by the server to deploy salt on the salt-ssh minion: https://docs.saltproject.io/en/latest/ref/runners/all/salt.runners.thin.html) deployment, we will get two different codebases of salt deployed on the minion (one codebase is from salt bundle package for the OS+arch and the other one is from salt-master delivered with salt-thin tarball).
As the sources of these two codebases are different (update channel of the Server and client tools relevant for the system) these codebases are not in sync.

> We can prevent deploying salt-thin in case if Salt Bundle has been deployed already and use it as preferred salt codebase to handle salt-ssh session with on the minion side.

Reviewer 2: As this is an RFC, you should be assertive in your proposal - the intent here is to describe what the problem is, how you would solve it and why that way is better than others rather than just proposing alternatives.

"We can" is not an assertion - your sentences should sound like "X will happen", "X will not happen" and so on (with justifications).

In this case: assuming the RFC is completely and correctly implemented, as a user, will I see salt-thin being used or not? If so, at what conditions?

The pre flight script calculates the bootstrap repository URL in a similar manner to the existing boostrap.sh script, based on the operating system and OS architecture of the system it is executed on.
It requires one parameter from the Uyuni server: entry point (host name and port number) for different contact methods and pathes (SSH from server/proxy, direct access to the repos or with the tunnel).

Pre flight script will use bootstrap repository for the distro to get the salt bundle from. No changes required for the repository.
Pre flight script downloads the `venv-enabled-ARCH.txt` file to get full path to the salt bundle package.

## Deploying Salt Bundle to the minion

We don't need to install Salt Bundle package on the minion as users concider salt-ssh as an agentless contact method and it's better not to install any service on the system even if it will never been started.
It can also help for the cases when venv-salt-minion is used on the system for any other purpose.
Pre flight script extracts only virtual environment of the bundle from the package.
Pre flight script is deploying it as described above.

## Using proper salt codebase

> On deploying Salt Bundle with pre flight script, without modification salt-thin (`salt-thin` is a tarball with salt codebase created by the server to deploy salt on the salt-ssh minion: https://docs.saltproject.io/en/latest/ref/runners/all/salt.runners.thin.html) deployment, we will get two different codebases of salt deployed on the minion (one codebase is from salt bundle package for the OS+arch and the other one is from salt-master delivered with salt-thin tarball).

Author: We excpect Salt Bundle to be updated more frequently in the repo than the salt codebase installed on the master. Mostly due to the customer usecases when client tools are updating automatically and bootrap repos are regenerating after reposync and most of the customers have some delay in updating the server. In this case we can expect salt bundle codebase more fresh. We can't be 100% due to the different usecases and update policies on customer side. But in case if there is no Salt Bundle in the bootstrap repo for some reason, or pre flight script unable to reach it due to some network issues or limitations, we will add extra logging to salt-api process to show that pre flight script returns some extra data. (Currently salt is not checking the output of the script, but only fails and show error message if pre flight script returns something other than 0). But finally we will use `salt-thin` as a fallback. The main drawback here that `salt-thin` in general is limited in number of modules shipped, and in case of getting rid of `py2X-compat-salt` it will work only with Python 3. On fails of handling salt-ssh sessions with salt-thin, salt is producing error on master side showing the root cause of the issue.

> On deploying Salt Bundle with pre flight script, without modification salt-thin (`salt-thin` is a tarball with salt codebase created by the server to deploy salt on the salt-ssh minion: https://docs.saltproject.io/en/latest/ref/runners/all/salt.runners.thin.html) deployment, we will get two different codebases of salt deployed on the minion (one codebase is from salt bundle package for the OS+arch and the other one is from salt-master delivered with salt-thin tarball).

Author: Let's discuss some additional details regarding this point.
Now we have two options:
1. Deploy Salt Bundle on the minion and fail if it's not available for some reason and do not use `salt-thin` at all. (we can just show an error message from the pre flight script)
2. Deploy Salt Bundle on the minion if possible (do not fail if not) and use `salt-thin` as a fall back method and get the error only if `salt-thin` fails.

With option 1 we can cause the issues for some of the customers. Here are the possible cases:
- The customer disabled auto bootsrap repo creation for some reason (it's mostly possible on migrating from previous version) and bootstrap repo was not updated with Salt Bundle at all. Bootstrapping new clients and handling of the sessions for already registered salt-ssh system for the OS will not be possible until bootstrap repo recreated manually.
- The customer is using salt-ssh with not supported OS and have no bootstrap repo for it at all.

The main possible drawback of the 2nd option: it's possible that some event can be handled different ways with Salt Bundle and `salt-thin` as the last one is limited in the functionality and is not shipped with all required modules inside. Additionally it builds with the salt codebase of the master, but not from the client tools (we expect client tools should be updated more frequently). As @moio pointed it could add some headache on debugging salt-ssh issues the customers have.

@meaksh @agraul @SchoolGuy not sure if I listed all of the cases we mentioned on the call.

The possible solution from me: we can use 1st option as default, but make it configurable to allow to switch to 2nd if the customer really need it for some reason.

> On deploying Salt Bundle with pre flight script, without modification salt-thin (`salt-thin` is a tarball with salt codebase created by the server to deploy salt on the salt-ssh minion: https://docs.saltproject.io/en/latest/ref/runners/all/salt.runners.thin.html) deployment, we will get two different codebases of salt deployed on the minion (one codebase is from salt bundle package for the OS+arch and the other one is from salt-master delivered with salt-thin tarball).

Reviewer 3: I think you cover the gist of what we discussed. I would like to point out that "customer using salt-ssh with not supported OS and have no bootstrap repo for it at all" is not only a potential problem for SUMA customers but also for uyuni contributors who want to enable new operating systems. While the former group is not supposed to use unsupported operating systems, we encourage the latter group to do exactly that. 

To me it makes sense to not have an automatic fallback but a manual "use salt-thin" configuration option, which we declare unsupported in SUMA.

> On deploying Salt Bundle with pre flight script, without modification salt-thin (`salt-thin` is a tarball with salt codebase created by the server to deploy salt on the salt-ssh minion: https://docs.saltproject.io/en/latest/ref/runners/all/salt.runners.thin.html) deployment, we will get two different codebases of salt deployed on the minion (one codebase is from salt bundle package for the OS+arch and the other one is from salt-master delivered with salt-thin tarball).

Reviewer 2: > To me it makes sense to not have an automatic fallback but a manual "use salt-thin" configuration option, which we declare unsupported in SUMA.

To me this sounds like a fair balancing act to start with. We can always change the policy and make that fully supported later, in case we observe a high volume of requests because of conditions we cannot predict today.
